From the New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams and this is the Daily.
[Music]
For months, President Trump has tried to
dismiss questions about his relationship
with Jeffrey Epstein, notably denying
that he'd authored a lewd birthday
message to the convicted sex offender.
On Monday, Congress released the message
and many more like it. Today, my
colleague David Enrich explains how the
book and an investigation into Epstein's
finances reveal how Epstein leveraged
his rich and powerful friends to fund a
year'slong criminal conspiracy.
It's Wednesday, September 10th.
[Music]
So David, on Monday we saw firsthand the
release of this now very infamous
birthday book to Jeffrey Epstein. It's
for his 50th birthday. It's from 2003.
It's filled with notes from a lot of
well-known, some rich, some powerful
people, many of whom wrote kind of
sexually explicit messages. And there's
one note in particular that by now a lot
of us have heard about or seen that
seems to be from President Trump. It
seems to be alluding to some secret that
Trump and Epstein have beyond though
being in some cases lewd or sexually
suggestive. I'm just sort of wondering
what we should be making from this book
overall.
>> Yeah. So, I mean to back up for a
second, one of the enduring mysteries of
Jeffrey Epstein is who surrounded him,
why they were surrounding him, and what
they were doing around him. And we've
known for a long time that there was a
whole band of very rich, very powerful
people who spent a lot of time and money
with Epstein. What most of those people
have said is that they did not have any
indication about what Epstein was up to
and they've really downplayed the extent
of their relationships. But on Monday,
because of a bipartisan and fairly
belated effort by Congress to really dig
into what's been going on with Epstein,
we finally got this birthday book that
has been talked about for months now.
And what this 238 page book reveals is
that first of all there were a ton of
rich, powerful and famous people in his
orbit, including people like Donald
Trump and Bill Clinton. And it also
shows that a lot of the people in the
book clearly had some level of awareness
that Epstein was compulsively pursuing
young women because over and over again
in the pages of this book, we see direct
and indirect references to that.
>> Let's go over some examples of actually
what's in the book. And I think to do
that, it would be helpful actually if
you could read some examples of some of
these notes that people left.
>> So the right place to start is this
letter or note that apparently was sent
by Donald Trump. It looks like a script
or something that is written in type
over the rough outlines of a naked
woman. And it starts by saying voice
over, there must be more to life than
having everything. And then it goes into
this imagined conversation between Trump
and Epstein. It says, "Donald, we have
certain things in common, Jeffrey.
Jeffrey, yes, we do, come to think of
it." And it wraps up with Trump
referring to enigmas. And then says, "A
pal is a wonderful thing. Happy
birthday, and may every day be another
wonderful secret." And then Trump signs
his name in his distinctive kind of
squiggly Sharpie signature where the
woman's pubic hair would be.
>> And obviously we should note here that
the White House has first denied that
this note even existed and now they're
denying that it is in fact Trump's
signature.
>> Yeah, that's right. Although I've got to
say it either is a very effective
forgery or it is Trump's signature and
we and others have found other
signatures that Trump made around that
same time and this appears to be
virtually an identical match. Okay, so
obviously that drawing and that
inscription does not prove that Trump
knew that Epstein was having sex with
underage girls, but it does raise a lot
of questions about what on earth their
relationship was and what Donald Trump
did know about his proclivities. I mean,
what do you make of that?
>> Look, there's no question that Epstein
and Trump in the 1990s and early 2000s
were close and were traveling in very
similar circles. There are a lot of
pictures of the two of them together
during that time period. We and others
have reported on an incident in which a
woman said that Trump sexually assaulted
her in Epstein's presence and at least
one young woman was lured into his sex
trafficking network after being
recruited by his associate Galain
Maxwell at Mara Lago.
>> Oh, really?
>> So, the relationship between these two
goes back years and years. And Trump has
said that he cut ties with Epstein
before Epstein was initially criminally
charged. And one of the big takeaways
from this birthday book finally being
public is that it really makes it much
harder for Trump to argue as he had that
this letter doesn't exist or is a
complete lie. We can now all see with
our own eyes what is in this letter and
what very clearly appears to be Trump's
signature.
>> And all of this is relevant, we should
be clear, because there is this huge and
growing question about Trump's
association with Epstein among his base,
right? A lot of President Trump's
supporters seem to have turned on him
over this issue. It feels like this is
the one issue that has really caused a
split within MAGA and it's one of the
reasons why there's such urgency behind
answering questions about what these two
men's relationship was to begin with.
>> Yeah, I think that's fair. I mean, the
backlash on the right is not because
MAGA folks are upset about Trump's
relationship with Epste so much as it is
that the Trump administration has
backpedalled furiously on their pledges
during the campaign to provide full
transparency about the Epstein
investigation. And Trump has gone from
being supportive of that to being the
single leading obstacle to full
transparency. And I think my best guess
based on the reporting that my
colleagues and I have done over the past
few months is that a big part of that is
that in the files that various
investigators have and that Epste's
estate has there are repeated references
to Donald Trump given his yearslong
close association with Epstein. And the
birthday book and Trump's apparent
message in the birthday book is just one
very clear indication of that.
>> Right. It's one thing for him to
campaign on release the files. Release
the files. is Jeffrey Epste. We need to
know everything about Jeffrey Epste.
What seems sort of clear now is that the
book at least suggests that one reason
why Trump might not want to actually
release all information relating to
Jeffrey Epste is that he's in there in
some capacity. Even if it's not
implicating him in a crime, it's at the
very least embarrassing in a way that he
does not want to feed.
>> I think that's right. And what's more is
that this is kind of emblematic of the
broader issue with transparency here. I
mean, Trump does not want to release all
the investigative files related to
Epstein, apparently because he is
concerned that he will be embarrassed by
some of what's in there. And the
birthday book is kind of a microcosm of
that. Because in addition to the letter
from Trump, there are a lot of other
letters and materials from other rich
and powerful people that in some ways
are even more revealing.
>> Could you give us a couple other
examples from the book? What What did
other people say? Who were they? What
gave you that impression?
Well, I'm just flipping through this
right now on my computer, and I'm
looking at one page in the book where
someone submitted a bunch of photos that
they had taken on a recent trip to
Africa that shows all manner of wild
animals with erect penises or engaging
in sex. And those photos are from a very
prominent person in Silicon Valley. And
look, the book is filled with other
examples like that where you have
bold-faced household names singing
Epstein's praises. And one of those
people is Bill Clinton, who doesn't have
any innuendo that we can see about sex
or anything like that, but refers in a
very positive way to Epstein's childlike
curiosity. And you've also got Leon
Black, the private equity billionaire
who refers to Ernest Hemingways, The Old
Man and the Sea, and notes that Epstein
is catching not fish, but women whom he
refers to as blondes, redheads, and
brunettes. M
>> you have Les Wexner, the founder of the
Limited and Victoria's Secret, who is
another of Epstein's longtime
benefactors, who says that, "I wanted to
get you what you want, so here it is."
And then has a sketch of a pair of
breasts. And then you have a strange one
from a guy named Joel Pashcow, who is a
longtime member of Mara Lago. and it
shows what appears to be a doctorred
picture of Pashcow,
Jeffrey Epstein, and a couple other
unidentified people, including what
appears to be a young woman. And they're
holding up this novelty check for
something like $22,000 that is kind of
fake signed by Donald Trump. And it
refers to Epstein having early talents
with money and women and claims that the
photo shows Epstein selling a fully
depreciated woman to Trump. And again,
it's important to note here that there's
no indication that Trump was in on this
joke or part of it, but it shows once
again that the worlds of Jeffrey Epstein
and Donald Trump often collided and
overlapped in those days in the early
2000s and late 1990s.
>> I also just want to point out that like
when I have been asked to, for example,
sign some sort of congratulatory book,
it's not like I'm seeing what other
people are writing, right? like I'm just
writing my own entry or like sending
something via email to be included in
like happy 50th anniversary or whatever.
And it's not like when you do those
things, you typically see what other
people are submitting, especially at
2003 pre- internet. It's not like
something's being emailed around. And so
it feels worth noting that like all of
these people who presumably are not
seeing what each other is submitting are
sending stuff that is at the very least
thematically connected, right? Like
they're all kind of saying the same
thing, which is this wink and a nod
toward Jeffrey Epstein's sexual
proclivities.
>> Yeah, that's exactly right.
And what we can see really clearly here
is that it was totally out in the open
that Epstein was obsessed with young
women. And they are not talking about
this in a porative way. They're
describing this in a laughing kind of
charming way that they think is really
adorable. And what's also clear in
looking at this 238 page book is that he
was not just pursuing women and girls.
He was also pursuing power and wealth.
And a lot of the people he surrounded
himself with were very wealthy and very
powerful. And they enabled him to build
connections and networks that ended up
fueling his criminal enterprise.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
>> David, before the break, you said that
Epstein's network basically enabled him
in a way that powered his criminal
enterprise. What exactly did you mean by
that?
>> Well, Jeffrey Epstein's sex trafficking
operation required a lot of things. One
of the most important things was money
so that he could procure young women and
girls really from all over the world.
And Epstein was very good at leveraging
the personal connections that he had
built up over the years, including with
many prominent people in the business
community to be able to move his money
all over the world. And as my colleagues
and I have been trying to understand the
flow of those finances over the past six
years, the name that keeps coming up
over and over again is his longtime bank
JP Morgan.
The relationship between Epstein and JP
Morgan started in the late 1990s. Epste
at the time was a money manager who was
sitting on a tremendous amount of
wealth. Something in the neighborhood of
$300 million. We think he advised some
very rich people including Les Wexner
who we spoke about earlier. He's the
founder of the Limited and Victoria
Secret who drew the pair of breasts in
Epstein's 50th birthday book. And so
Epstein arrives at JP Morgan and very
soon he becomes a really lucrative
client. He's generating millions of
dollars in fees for the bank. And just
as important, he is introducing bank
executives to a whole roster of wealthy
people that the bank can try to convert
into clients.
And one of the big names there in 2003
is Sergey Brin, the co-founder of
Google, who starts to move what would
become $4 billion of assets into JP
Morgan.
>> And I would imagine that JP Morgan was
quite grateful for that kind of an
introduction. I mean, there's very few
people on planet Earth that could bring
$4 billion into a bank, obviously.
>> Yeah. And so it is not a surprise that
Epstein quickly becomes one of the most
prized clients at JP Morgan because of
his ability to bring in people like
Sergey Brin.
[Music]
And the most important person at JP
Morgan in terms of fostering this very
lucrative relationship with Epstein is
an executive named Jess Staley. And
Epstein helps kind of vault his career
up to a new plane. Staley at the time is
an upandcoming executive and he really
hitches his wagon to Epstein who in 2004
helps orchestrate this acquisition in
which JP Morgan and Staley buy this
prominent hedge fund and it was a
transaction that was transformative for
JP Morgan but even more so it was
transformative for Jess Staley.
>> Okay. So basically, if I'm understanding
you right, not only is Jeffrey Epste
making money for JP Morgan, but he's
also enriching this one executive by
bringing in his rich and powerful
friends, right? Like basically these two
men's fortunes are sort of becoming more
and more intertwined.
>> Yeah, that's exactly right. And Epstein
is getting out of this quite a bit of
value. He gets the legitimacy and
credibility of being affiliated in a
close way with one of the world's
largest and most prestigious banks. He
is getting this whole suite of banking
services from JP Morgan. He's getting
loans. He's getting wire transfers. He's
even getting JP Morgan to open accounts
for some of his associates, including
some who turn out to be Epstein's
victims and whom the bank didn't even
meet before agreeing to create accounts
for them. And he's also with Jess Staley
building a relationship that for years
will protect him when people at the bank
start getting concerned about how
Jeffrey Epstein is using his money and
the role that the bank is playing in his
enterprise.
>> When you say concerned, like what do you
mean by that? What is he doing that
raises concerns? There are a lot of
things Epstein was doing that raise red
flags within the bank and one of the
biggest is that he was on a very regular
basis withdrawing huge sums of money
from the bank in cash and that is a
typically a warning sign of potential
illicit activity because criminal
enterprises tend to be financed by cash
not by things that leave a paper trail.
And he was also wiring money all over
the world. And anti-moneyaundering
experts and compliance officers as well
as some really highranking executives
within the bank saw a lot of these
transactions and became really concerned
pretty early on that what Epstein was
doing deserved greater scrutiny and in
some cases they even argued that he
should be kicked out of the bank as a
client. This was ultimately though a
dead end because executives like Jess
Staley repeatedly went to bat for him
and overrode those concerns voiced by
people elsewhere in the organization.
>> Mhm.
>> And this was happening not just when it
came to people's concerns about the
transactions and the activity they were
seeing within the bank. It also happened
when starting in 2006 and going on
through 2008, Epstein was indicted,
arrested, and ultimately pleaded guilty
to soliciting prostitution from a minor
and went to jail and registered as a sex
offender. Even then, Jess Staley, among
other executives, successfully managed
to keep him as a client of JP Morgan
>> because Staley's career is hugely tied
to not just Epstein, but Epstein's
network.
>> Yeah, that's right. And there's more to
it. I mean, Epstein and Staley over the
years became quite close personally. So,
for example, when Epstein was
incarcerated in Florida in 2008 and
2009, Staley went to visit him. They
exchanged a ton of emails. Staley even
went and spent time at some of Epstein's
properties in various parts of the
world, including sometimes when Epste
wasn't even there. On at least one
occasion, Staley had sex with a young
woman whom he met in Epstein's townhouse
and who later said that Epstein had been
sexually abusing her and farmering her
out for sex with some of his friends.
So, this was an extraordinarily close
and multiaceted relationship between
Epstein, who at this point is a
convicted sex criminal and a registered
sex offender on the one hand, and one of
the highest ranking executives on Wall
Street on the other. It's kind of
amazing that this one executive, Jess
Staley, has so much power. Like, he's
basically almost single-handedly able to
keep him at the bank despite the fact
that he is a very public criminal at
this point.
>> And I think this speaks to the degree to
which JP Morgan and his executives were
really blinded by greed here. Epste was
helping them in a lot of really
important ways, not just making them
money directly, but the clients that he
was introducing them to. And this
continues for years, by the way. We
found emails in which Epstein appears to
be introducing JP Morgan bankers to
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu. He's trying to foster a
relationship between the bank and Bill
Gates. Epstein's working as essentially
as a middleman for Leon Black, the
private equity billionaire who was also
a contributor to the birthday book. He's
bringing him to the bank as well. And so
there are all these reasons to keep
doing business with Epstein.
>> So this relationship goes on for years.
How does it actually end? I presume it
ends eventually.
>> Yeah, it does break. And this starts in
2012 when the bank's CEO Jaime Diamond
demotes Staley, who by this point is
essentially the number two executive at
the bank, which then prompts Staley to
leave the bank in 2013. And by the way,
there is an open question as to how much
the bank CEO knew about all of this at
the time. He is denied even knowing that
Epstein was a client of the bank until
much later.
[Music]
But in any case, after Staley leaves the
bank in 2013, there is another chorus of
opposition to having Epstein as a
client. And with no one left to protect
him or defend him, Epstein is kicked out
of the bank in 2013.
And that brings down the curtain on a
relationship that lasted at least 15
years, involved more than $1 billion of
transactions that JP Morgan processed
for Epstein,
and playing a role that many experts now
believe was a crucial part of Epstein's
sex trafficking machinery,
>> which is what Congress is trying to get
to the bottom of, Right. Everything
we've been discussing about the
relationship between Epste and JP Morgan
is illuminating of how on earth he was
able to power this enterprise that as
you said required a ton of cash. And so
you can see it seems that the people,
the networks that are at least partially
illuminated in that birthday book are
directly tied and intertwined with the
kind of financial ingratiation that
allows him to get away with what he did
for so long.
>> Yeah, I think that's right. And this
goes a long way toward answering some of
the central questions and mysteries that
continue to surround Epstein. Namely,
how he was able to finance this criminal
enterprise. And that is one of the very
central questions that lawmakers are now
after years of not really doing anything
on this are now starting to demand
answers and demand documents. It also
feels worth noting that this entire
story confirms
something that feels at least
conspiratorial on its face, but now we
know to be totally true, right? That
there's a powerful network of people and
institutions that enable child sex
trafficking. Like people are so
dismissive of people who believed in the
QAnon conspiracy and yet here we are
talking about all these rich powerful
men who looked the other way while
Jeffrey Epstein pursued young women and
the bank that financed him.
>> I think that's a very fair point to make
and I think it's a big part of the
reason that the Trump administration's
efforts to continuously just shrug this
off and hope this is going to go away
are not likely to succeed. This is not
just an issue about Democrats trying to
get information that might embarrass the
president. This is a really bipartisan
initiative at this point and it's fueled
in large part by folks on the right and
in the MAGA movement who have long
suspected that there is a conspiracy led
by rich powerful people and institutions
to support Epstein. And here we have
evidence that suggests that that's at
least partially true. And I think the
more those suspicions get stoked and
confirmed, the more calls and demands
there are going to be from across the
political spectrum for the Trump
administration to provide much more
transparency than they already have,
>> which is not really what we've seen from
Republican lawmakers, right? This great
or widespread appetite to go against the
president in any way.
>> Yeah, I agree. This is a pretty unusual
moment and I think it speaks to the
broad bipartisan interest in the Epstein
scandal and the desire for transparency.
And so we've already seen in recent
weeks that the House Oversight Committee
with support from both Republicans and
Democrats has issued subpoenas to the
Trump administration as well as to the
Epsteina estate. And that's where we got
the birthday book from. That was the
Epsteina estate complying with a
congressional subpoena. And in the weeks
ahead, there is likely to be a vote that
is being pushed primarily by Democrats,
but also by some Republicans that would
require the Trump Justice Department to
release a whole trove, basically
everything they are sitting on related
to Epstein. And it's likely to be a
close vote. And I don't know what the
outcome will be in the House or in the
Senate, but it's very clear that there
are going to be continued efforts from
Congress to try and force the
administration to be much more
transparent than it has been so far.
[Music]
David, thank you so much.
>> Thanks for having me.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
Israel attempted to kill senior members
of Hamas in an air strike on Tuesday in
Qatar, a sharp escalation of the war in
Gaza. Qatar is a US ally and had been
acting as a mediator in the conflict.
The strike threatened to undermine those
negotiations and also risked
antagonizing the Qatari government in
part because the country's political and
economic stability hinges on its
reputation as a haven for business and
tourism in a volatile region.
And a federal judge late Tuesday
temporarily blocked President Trump from
removing Lisa Cook from the Federal
Reserve's Board of Governors, allowing
her to continue serving as she contests
her recent dismissal.
The decision follows Mr. Trump's
attempts to fire Miss Cook over
allegations that she falsified documents
related to her mortgages and comes amid
the president's ongoing pressure
campaign on the Federal Reserve to lower
interest rates.
Today's episode was produced by Alex
Stern and Austin Chatterbait. It was
edited by MJ Davis Lynn and Paige Cowitt
and was engineered by Alyssa Moxley. The
special thanks to Matthew Goldstein,
Jessica Silver Greenberg, and Michael
Gold.
[Music]
[Applause]
That's for the daily. I'm Rachel Abrams.
See you tomorrow.
[Music]